So, next stop, Nicole.
So, yeah.
Okay.
Hi, everyone. Hi, everyone at home.
So, yeah, I'm talking today about how to maybe use SPDX to establish traceability for functional safety.
So, about me, yeah, I've been a software developer for quite some time, always working in, yeah, some kind of safety-critical projects,
and that somehow brought me about 12 years ago to, yeah, really focusing on functional safety.
And so, currently, I'm working as a tech consultant still, yeah, mainly in functional safety, a little bit security, a little bit license-compliant,
so everything that gets critical for software components.
I'm involved in some of the Linux Foundation projects, and, yeah, just important thing about me, I'm really not good with faces and names.
So, if you walk past by me and I don't say hello, it's just because I'm not really sure if it's you.
So, just say hello to me and, yeah, then I know it's you.
And you can contact me usually with a handle at Nick Pappler at the usual social media or GitHub places if you want to find me.
So, what can we do for functional safety with SPDX?
So, I'm not sure who at all here is aware about functional safety or what it is.
Oh, a few, that's cool. So, yeah.
It's more than a thought, so I'm happy.
Yeah. So, yeah, safety, generally, it's a freedom of risk or a minimization of risk of getting heard of doing something bad.
And the functional safety part of that is that whatever can break or go wrong in your system is handled, is detected.
So, you have mainly two options here. Avoid something bad to happen.
Avoid your microcontroller to break. Avoid your software to do something you haven't intended it to do.
Or, at least, to detect things going wrong and then define, initiate mitigation measures, define safe states,
what to do when things go wrong, and implement this and hopefully have a safe system at the end.
So, what do we need if we want to do this?
So, as I already said, you need a system that's robust and suitable for your safety application so that it in itself has some features that it doesn't kill people,
that it doesn't hurt people, that it doesn't hurt the environment, and several levels of analysis, of tests, of verification measures
to prove that your system is your system as you have intended it to be.
And to do so, to really make sure what you have specified, you have implemented in the end, you should have a process,
you should have guidelines, methods, and you should plan how to do this.
And, unfortunately, this results in a lot of documents.
You usually start with something called a safety plan, so it's kind of project management plan or any kind of plan strategy, how you want to do this.
It's a plan how you want to verify with this, you have your requirements, you have an architecture, go coding guidelines,
you have loads of documents, 50 to 100 documents in the end, so it's really a pain.
So, and I think most of us here are engineers, and yeah, engineers like to engineer.
And so we like to create a fantastic system, maintaining a fantastic system.
Yeah, we do have to do, at least in the industry life, apply a process to do so, and then we have to ensure there is all documentation in place
and all evidences are consistent, so yeah.
First two things we really like to do, we like to create things, we like to maintain things, we like to have them fantastic.
Applying a process, yeah, if we have to, some like me like processes, but I think 99% don't.
And yeah, ensuring all documentation and evidences are consistent, that's for at least for most engineers it's a no-no.
You don't like this, this is pain, this is at least emotionally that feels like it's something I have to do on top because I know what I did,
I know what I want to do, why do I need to record this, it's clear.
So just if we assume the process to create and maintain all artifacts that you need for functional safety, so the plans, the requirements, the verification evidences,
it's established and you will do this, but you still have the biggest pain there, keeping it complete and keeping it consistent during all the time,
for all your variants, during all your patches.
So the idea was then, hey, why can't we use SPDIC style solution there where you have the full traceability of a safety package or whatever to track all your possible combinations of your system.
And there is something in SPDIC called relationships and these relationships actually, when you look into them, describe exactly what we do in functional safety with the idea of traceability,
so really traceability, this belongs to that in that version and it goes into that and it's created according to that.
So actually when you look into the relationships list, at least nearly everything that you need is there.
So how could these relationships then really work for functional safety?
So FUSA is Geeks speak for functional safety, Geeks speak for functional safety.
So the documentation structure for functional safety usually consists of three types of documents.
On the one hand side, you have all your plans, your processes, your guidelines, your strategy, how to do things.
Then you have your requirements and specifications saying, okay, what have we done or what do we plan to do from technical point of view?
And you have all your verification evidences, your safety analyzes, your STPA, tests, test cases, reports, any kind of evidence in the end.
And yeah, we are that old, we like the V model from functional safety point of view, at least we want to try to have something that is understandable by people who like the V model.
So any kind of documentation of work products, of artifacts that we have usually fits into this V model.
So we have the requirements, we have the full workflow, we have tests associated with requirement style information,
we have reports that document that we did this test and the outcome of the test.
And we have all these documents that are associated with the processes, the plans, the guidelines, how to qualify things, how to assess stuff in the end.
So we have everything in plans, we have everything in the V model.
And as you see, the documents are some kind of interconnected.
So when we speak from the functional safety point of view, what are plans, processes and guidelines, what are they, what's that kind of document?
And in the end, actually, it's just kind of artifact that specifies something, it specifies how to do things, how you plan to do things.
How another document or another artifact should be structured or created.
So it's always a specification.
So when you look into standard safety document, the safety plan.
Safety plan itself, it's just a specification how to do safety in the project or for the product.
The coding guidelines, it's a specification how to create the code.
So it's always a specification, a plan is always a specification how to do things.
Then when we look into the product documentation, yeah, what kind of product documentation will we need to manage or do we have in our functional safety project?
We have requirements, we have report type documents, test results, some analysis results and we have the code.
And when we look into the product style document, product documentation, it's a little bit more complex than plans.
So, yeah, a safety requirement specification clearly, it's a specification of the safety requirements of what you want to achieve from the safety point of view.
A unit test is a test case related to a specification part or to a part of code.
The unit test report itself then is a documentation of the test case again.
So, yeah, and as you see, everything is connected, everything can be expressed with a relationship.
And, yeah, I'm working functional safety for quite some time and always say it's about a safe product, it's not about assessments, it's not about standards.
But, yeah, the only present question always is what do I need for the assessment, how can I make my assessor happy in the end?
So, I say you have to have a safe product and they say I want to make my assessor happy.
So, what do you need to make the assessor happy?
Yeah, to begin with, they will ask you for a lot of planning documents, the safety plan, a product architecture or your design, a strategy, how you want to do things.
So, really, that they have in the beginning an idea, yeah, what's in the scope, what do you plan to do, do you have at all an idea of what you want to do?
Then, yeah, the concept you show then should be sound, should be safe, at least you should have an idea at the beginning.
And you should have an idea about the completeness and consistency of your plans and in the end really present everything as a consistent, complete and, yeah, full product.
So, when we look into this, it's always, again, it's related documents and from the assessment point of view it's a package and the package is described by a list.
So, you always have lists of documents and you say, okay, for this, in this point of time, dear assessor or dear internally QM department, we have this part of information and we start from there.
And then later you have more information and say, okay, I have a new package and you get this one.
And in the end you have the full package and you have all your reports, all your configuration, all your calibrations and you will deliver that one.
And actually when we look into this from the SPDX point of view, yeah, it's all information that you can use to generate S-bombs for safety or we call them now safety S-bombs to really support your safety compliance argumentation and to really deliver the information always what is in the product, what is in the scope.
So, how can I use this maybe in detail?
So, as I said before, usually when you start an assessment, you start with a concept assessment.
So, what's the plan? What's the scope of the product? What's the safety scope of the product? What's maybe the beginning architecture?
And how do you plan to do things? Then you have a final assessment saying, okay, we are ready now.
We want to get a final safety approval. We are really sure that we have a great product and we want to ship this.
And as a real life is, you will have reassessments because your product is involving, you have CVs and all that stuff.
So, what do we really need? So, as I said again, concept assessment has a goal that you have a proof that your concept is sound, that you can generally start working like that.
So, you have your safety plan, any other initial plans where you set up how to do things, you'll have a safety concept.
So, yeah, you will have a package of information, you will have a list of things that you want to deliver.
So, when we look into the S-PROM types that we heard about in the morning today, it's actually nothing else than a design S-PROM.
It's how to do things. You can think about it like when you build a house, it's like the plan, how to build a house.
What will be the methods you use? Will it be in stone? Who will come to do this? Will you need certain machinery? Something like that.
Then, the next stage really is go through your assessment stages. So, yeah, you have your concept ready and you won't have all the things ready and then ship them
without some milestones in between. So, for each milestone you will have a package of things, you will have a list of things that are not really built into a final product
but that are, yeah, somehow sources of information for what you have done so far.
So, yeah, you could, for example, use the S-PROM for that, really as a list of all documents that will be part of your product up to then.
Then, final stage is, yeah, you have finally everything that you want to have in your product and you start testing.
So, you have really all your plans, you have all your specifications, you have all your test cases, you most probably will have all your test reports
and you will deploy this and see if it runs the first time. So, yeah, it's the first build that you have of your product.
So, you can ship a build S-PROM with completely everything that you need for the product, for the testing of the product.
And then, when we look into final things, this is when things become tricky because, yeah, I come from the automotive world, yeah, you have one software build
and then you have a bunch of calibration and configuration data that goes with your software into the vehicle that goes on the road or into several types of vehicles.
You have then really a different set of configuration and calibration data going with your release and that's really getting into the question, what is really deployed on your system.
So, because you have your runnable and you have your configuration data and you have a bunch of versions of that and it's really hard, honestly speaking, to keep track of this.
So, here, this deployed S-PROM would really come into handy, say, okay, we have everything and we know with a generated list what's really deployed on this vehicle.
So, the real beauty, what I really see in this approach is that you can really close the loop about what you want to have and what you have in the end.
So, standard in safety development is, yeah, you have the configuration management plan saying, okay, what types of documents do you have, what do you want to do them, how do you want the versions and what are baselines and branching and all that stuff.
And you have a list of documents that you plan to have. So, that's really, yeah, it's called configuration items in the most projects. It's really the list from starting from the safety plan down to each source file that you have.
But in the end, again, you will compile this and what you really have in the end and that's usually then in the safety world, it's the safety case. So, really, a compilation of all safety evidence that you have.
In most cases, it's a copy of the configuration item list with all information attached, what's the final and valid version of this configuration item list member that goes into the final release.
And in, yeah, most cases that I see, this is a manual process. There's a part partially they might generate something, but there's a lot of manual stuff in there.
And then, yeah, comes the assessment type. You need to really make sure that everything that's in the safety case, or everything that's in the configuration item list really goes into the safety case and that it's consistent and all that stuff and usually this is really done in manual spot checks.
So, it's a pain and it's error prone because spot checks are, will just give you a picture of how you can, yeah, that's just so far you can go with spot checks.
So, the idea here, oops, typo. The idea here is really that you have your generated S-bomb with everything that is deployed.
And you can then automatically more or less check back is everything that I have in my generated S-bomb from the configuration item list.
Do I have some open ends in my relationships? Because if I have open ends, there might be, there will be some gap in what I have, maybe not tested, not verified, or just not thought about, maybe in my analysis.
So, you will see the open ends. You will see that there are things that might not match.
And next beauty is, yeah, you can do this process manually as often if you want to, but it is a pain and it takes time.
And it is error prone and it needs a human and it needs a lot of x-lists, PDFs, whatever. It's a pain. It's hard to document. It's hard to keep track with it.
And it's not like, yeah, what we had maybe 10 years ago that you release once a year and maybe you have a patch every three months if you're really into patches.
You have ZVs coming in. You have continuous integration. You have bugs. You have product variants.
And doing this loop all the time manually, you won't be able to, you are not able to keep track of it.
One of the biggest issues in the safety world at the moment, how can we have changes due to the CVs, due to the security things that we need to implement, we need to update.
We can't say, oh, we have a safety certification. We cannot update. We cannot direct to security issues. That's just not possible.
And so the idea here is as long as you have your S-bomb, your safety bomb, whatever you want to call it, of really all your documents in the configurations that you have in the end, then you can automatically scan again.
Do I have this? Where do I need to change things? Change things. Have this run again and see if you're still complete.
So, yeah, that's the idea. So we started with this idea about, yeah, I think maybe half a year ago.
So there are still a lot of open topics. It's details about how to set up the tooling, what tooling to use, what do we need, what is there, how can I do this.
Then the full relationship model between the safety artifacts. It's also ongoing. A complete model about documented evident types.
So we do have document types, but this is sufficient what we currently see. Then we want to have a pilot project as proof of concept. That's candidates for that.
And yeah, I'm from the safety world. I speak safety compliance standards, but there are security standards, for example, around other standards that ask for this compliance information.
There's now in the automotive 2434, that's a new security standard. It asks for similar things than the safety standards. I do have a great system. Yeah, that's possible.
I need a consistent set of documents documenting that I have a great system. That's where we might have a problem.
So that are the things we're still looking into. And yeah, happy if anybody wants to join us, we meet every Friday evening.
We have a call every information you will find here at the page of the FUSA special interest group at the SPDX project.
Okay, so questions, please. Feedback, comments. Do you think it's complete crap? Can this go somewhere? Yeah.
So you presented the process like what it takes for safety case to be made. Yeah. But I could not get what your group is doing. So are you building something that enables you.
Okay, what the group is actually doing. How actually SPDX is being played here.
Okay, so the question is, what is the group actually doing and how does SPDX come to play. So yeah, we do not define the process. So the process as the structures. Just give me a sec.
So the structure like this and how to do things is already there. How do I make these things. And there are a lot of ideas around how to connect these things because you need to have that full traceability.
It's from having handwritten tags in Word documents to using special lifecycle tooling. These approaches are established, but they are not so well interconnected most of the times.
And later when you come into frequent updates, product variations, then it's really getting hard to keep track of things.
And the idea of what we are currently following is that each piece of these information doesn't need to be in a tool. It doesn't need to be in a special kind of format.
We can connect these with these relationships from SPDX that are already in the 2.3 specification.
So we do the exercise of the mapping that everything, sorry, that we fit for the spec and maybe things go into 3.0 or later.
Yeah, this is a follow up or an extra.
So the question is there is there a publicly available example, not fully. So we're talking about how to create the use cases, how to create the overviews in the course. So you're always welcome to call in and see what we have.
I really like this as an engineer, solution architect, having something like that and all the traceability, particularly out to the external world of the regulations.
So when we did the safety thing, we had 800 documents to try and trace and they're all changing.
And actually you want to look at the impact assessment of that change of change of regulation or move to a different market. You want to be able to see that.
So if you could capture that and whether it's cyber or safety or anything, having that traceability must be a great movement.
So I'm sure people like to see them would love it for this type of system.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, this thing is.
I'm thinking that added to ship.
Huge things about safety and the main international stuff like that. So capturing all this in a thing so you can see the relationships and change.
If this went from version one to version two, where where's the impact? Which part of the design, which part of the supply chain?
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, I would also love to have this. This is at the moment the idea is really OK, I need the evidence for me because I need to be sure what I have and what I have deployed.
But yeah, the next thing is I'm a component part or I'm making component part and I ship this down the supply chain.
And the next one who wants to consume this wants the information.
And it doesn't make not even maybe not want or I don't want to give all out all the information that I have, but I can give the relationships and the completeness information and I can do this in an automated way that can go into an automated supply chain process.
Supply chain, you pass the relevant bits of the standards.
Exactly.
Just say everyone follows this thing because actually 95% of the time.
No one does that anymore.
Yeah, time's up. Time's up. Sorry. So yeah, would be great to follow up on this. Please meet us on Fridays in the evening if you want to.
And yeah, I'm happy to talk about this later with whoever shows up.
Yeah, sorry for that.
Thank you.